hi everyone the world's largest and most
devastating environmental industrial
project is situated in the heart of the
largest and most intact forest in the
world Canada's boreal forest it
stretches right across northern Canada
in Labrador it's home to the largest
remaining wild caribou herd in the world
the George River caribou herd numbering
approximately 400,000 animals
unfortunately when I was there I
couldn't find one of them but you have
the antlers as proof all across the
boreal were blessed with its incredible
abundance of wetlands wetlands globally
are one of the most endangered
ecosystems there are absolutely critical
ecosystems they clean air they clean
water they sequester large amounts of
greenhouse gases and they're home to a
huge diversity of species in the boreal
they are also the home where almost 50%
of the 800 bird species found in North
America migrate north to breed and raise
their young in Ontario the boreal
marches down south to the north shore of
Lake Superior and these incredibly
beautiful boreal forests were the
inspiration for some of the most famous
art in Canadian history the group of
seven were very inspired by this
landscape and so the boreal is not just
a really key part of our natural
heritage but also an important part of
our cultural heritage in Manitoba this
is an image from the east side of Lake
Winnipeg and this is the home of the
newly designated UNESCO culture cultural
heritage site in in Saskatchewan as
across all of the boreal home to some of
our most famous rivers an incredible
network of rivers and lakes that every
school-aged child learns about the piece
the Athabasca the Churchill here the
Mackenzie and these networks was were
the historical roots for the Voyager and
the courier Dubois the first non
Aboriginal explorers of northern Canada
that taking from the First Nations
people used canoes and paddle to explore
for a trade route a Northwest Passage
for the fur trade in the north the
boreal is bordered by the tundra and
just below that in Yukon we have this
incredible valley the tombstone Valley
and the tombstone valley is home to the
porcupine caribou herd now you've
probably heard about the porcupine
caribou herd in the context of its
breeding ground in Arctic National
Wildlife Refuge
well the wintering ground is also
critical and it also is not protected
and is potentially could be potentially
exploited for gas and mineral rights the
western border of the boreal in British
Columbia is marked by the coast
mountains and on the other side of those
mountains is the greatest remaining
temperate rainforest in the world the
Great Bear Rainforest and we'll discuss
that in a few minutes in a bit more
detail all across the boreal it's home
for a huge incredible range of
indigenous peoples and a rich and varied
culture and I think that one of the
reasons why so many of these groups have
retained a Link to the Past know their
native languages the songs the dances
the traditions I think part of that
reason is because of the remoteness the
spans and the wilderness of this almost
95% intact ecosystem and I think
particularly now as we see ourselves in
a time of environmental crisis we can
learn so much from these people who have
lived so sustainably in this ecosystem
for over 10,000 years in the heart of
this ecosystem is the very antithesis of
all of these values that we've been
talking about and I think these are some
of the core values that make us proud to
be Canadians this is the Alberta tar
sands the largest oil reserves on the
planet outside of Saudi Arabia trapped
underneath the boreal forests and
wetlands of northern Alberta are these
vast reserves of this sticky tar like
bitumen and the mining and the
exploitation of that is creating
devastation on a scale that the planet
has never seen before I want to try to
convey some sort of a sense of the size
of this if you look at that truck there
it is the largest truck at
kind on the planet it's a 400-ton
capacity dump truck and it's dimensions
are 45 feet long by 35 feet wide and 25
feet high if I stand beside that truck
my head comes to around the bottom of
the yellow part of that hubcap within
the dimensions of that truck
you could build a 3,000 square-foot
two-story home quite easily I did the
math so instead of thinking of that as a
truck think of that as a 3,000
square-foot home that's not a bad-sized
home and line those trucks slash homes
back and forth across there from the
bottom all the way to the top and then
think of how large that very small
section of one mine is now you can apply
that same kind of thinking here as well
now here you see as before of course as
you go further on these trucks become
like a pixel again imagine those all
back and forth there how large is that
one portion of a mine that's that that
would be a huge vast metropolitan area
probably much larger than the City of
Victoria and this is just one of a
number of minds ten Minds so far right
now this is one section of one mining
complex and there are about another 40
or 50 in the approval process no tar
sands mine has actually ever been denied
approval so it is essentially a rubber
stamp the other method of extraction is
what's called the in situ and here
massive amounts of water are superheated
and pumped through the ground through
this vast networks of pipelines seismic
lines drill pads compressor stations and
even though this looks maybe not quite
as repugnant as the mines it's even more
damaging in some ways it impacts and and
fragments a larger part of the
wilderness where there's 90% reduction
of key species like woodland caribou and
grizzly bears and it consumes even more
energy more water and produces at least
as much greenhouse gas so these in situ
developments are at least as
ecologically down the damaging as the
mines the oil produced from either
method
produces more greenhouse gas emissions
than any other oil this is one of the
reasons why it's called the world's
dirtiest oil it's also one of the
reasons why it is the largest and
fastest-growing single source of carbon
in Canada and it is the other also a
reason why Canada is now number 3 in
terms of producing a carbon per person
the tailings ponds are the largest toxic
impoundments on the planet oil sands or
rather I should say tar sands oil sands
is a PR created term so that the oil
companies wouldn't be trying to promote
something that sounds like a sticky
tar-like substance that's the world
dirty world's dirtiest oil so they
decide to call it oil sands the tar
sands consume more water than any other
oil process three to five barrels of
water are taken polluted and then
returned into tailings ponds the largest
toxic impoundments in the planet
Syncrude just one of the licensees in
just one of their tailings ponds dumps
250,000 tons of this toxic gunk every
single day that's creating the largest
toxic impoundments in the history of the
planet so far this is enough toxin to
cover the face of Lake Erie a foot deep
and the tailings ponds range in size up
to nine thousand acres that's two-thirds
the size of the entire island of
Manhattan that's like from Wall Street
at the southern edge of Manhattan up to
maybe a hundred and twentieth Street so
this is an absolutely this is one of the
larger tailings ponds this might be what
I don't know half the size of Manhattan
and you can see in the context it's just
a relatively small section of one of ten
mining complexes and another forty to 50
on stream to be approved soon and of
course these ma these tailings ponds and
while you can't see many ponds from
outer space and you can see these so
maybe we should stop calling them ponds
these massive toxic waste lands are
built unlined and on the banks of the
Athabasca River and the Athabasca River
drains downstream to a rage of
Aboriginal communities in for Chippewa
on the 800
people there are finding toxins in the
food chain this has been scientifically
proven the tar sands toxins are in the
food chain and this is causing cancer
rates up to 10 times what they are in
the rest of Canada in spite of that
people have to live have to eat this
food in order to survive the incredibly
high price of flying food into these
remote northern Aboriginal communities
and the high rate of unemployment makes
this an absolute necessity for survival
and not that many years ago I was lent a
boat by a First Nations man and he said
do when you go out on the river do not
under any circumstances eat the fish
it's carcinogenic and yet on the front
the front ports of that Vince Calvin I
saw for fish he had to feed its family
to survive in as a parent I just can't
imagine what that does to your soul and
that's what we're doing the boreal
forest is also perhaps our best defense
against global warming and climate
change the boreal forest sequester is
more carbon than any other terrestrial
ecosystem and this is absolutely key so
what we're doing is we're taking the
most concentrated a greenhouse gas
sink twice as much greenhouse gases are
sequestered in in the boreal per acre
than they than the tropical rainforests
and what we're doing is we're destroying
this carbon sink turning it into a
carbon bomb and we're replacing that
with the largest industrial project in
the history of the world which is
producing the most high carbon
greenhouse gas emitted
oil in the world and we're doing this on
the second largest oil reserves in the
planet this is one of the reasons why
Canada originally a climate change hero
we are one of the first signatories of
the Kyoto Accord now we're the country
that has full-time lobbyists in the
European Union in Washington DC
threatening trade wars when when these
countries talk about wanting to bring in
positive legislation to limit the import
of high carbon fuel
of greenhouse gas emissions anything
like this at international conferences
whether they're in Copenhagen or Cancun
international conferences on climate
change were the country that gets the
dinosaur award every single day as being
the biggest obstacle to progress on this
issue just 70 miles downstream is the
world's largest freshwater Delta the
Peace Athabasca Delta the only one at
the juncture of all four migratory
flyways this is a globally significant
wetland perhaps the greatest on the
planet incredible habitat for half the
bird species you find in North America
migrating here and also the last refuge
for the largest herd of wild bison and
also of course critical habitat for
another whole range of other species but
it too is being threatened by the
massive amount of water being drawn from
the Alpha Baska which feeds these
wetlands and also the incredible toxic
burden of the largest toxic unlined
impoundments on the planet which are
leaching in to the food chain for all
the species downstream so as bad as all
that is things are going to get much
worse much much worse this is the
infrastructure as we see it about now
this is what's planned for 2015 and you
can see here the the keystone pipeline
which would take tar sands raw down to
the Gulf Coast punching a pipeline
through the heart the agricultural heart
of North America of the United States
and securing the contract with the
dirtiest fuel in the in the world by
consumption of the United States and
promoting a huge disincentive to a
sustainable clean energy future for
America here you see the route down the
Mackenzie Valley this would put a
pipeline to take natural gas from the
Beaufort Sea through the heart of the
third largest watershed Basin in the
world and the only one which is 95%
intact and building a pipeline with an
industrial highway would change forever
this incredible wilderness which is a
true a rare
on the planet today so the Great Bear
Rainforest is just over over the hill
there within a few miles we go from
these dry boreal forests of a hundred
year old trees maybe ten inches across
and soon we're in the coastal temperate
rain forest rain drenched 100,000 year
old trees a 20 feet across a completely
different ecosystem and the Great Bear
Rainforest is generally considered to be
the largest coastal temperate rainforest
ecosystem in the world some of the
greatest densities of most some of the
most iconic and threatened species on
the planet and yet there's a proposal of
course to build a pipeline to take huge
tankers ten times the size of the Exxon
Valdez through some of the most
difficult to navigate waters in the
world we're only just a few years ago a
bc ferry ran aground when one of these
tar sands tankers carrying the dirtiest
oil ten times as much as CL exxon valdez
eventually hits a rock and goes down
we're going to have one of the worst
ecological disasters this planet has
ever seen and here we have the plan out
to 2030 what they're proposing is a
almost four time increase in production
and that would industrialize an area the
size of Florida in doing so we'll be
removing a large part of our greatest
carbon sink and replacing it with the
most high greenhouse gas emission aisle
in the future the world does not need
any more tar mines world does not need
any more pipelines to whet our addiction
to fossil fuels and the world certainly
does not need the largest toxic
impoundments to grow and multiply and
further threaten the downstream
communities and let's face it we all
live downstream in an era of global
global warming and climate change what
we need is we all need to act to ensure
that Canada respects the massive amounts
of freshwater that we hold in this
country we need to ensure that these
wetlands and forests that are our best
and greatest and most critical defense
against global warming are protected and
we are not releasing that carbon
bomb into the atmosphere and we need to
all gather together and say no to the
tar sands and we can do that there is a
huge Network all over the world fighting
to stop this project and I quite simply
think that this is not something that
should be decided just in Canada
everyone in this room everyone across
Canada everyone listening to this
presentation has a role to play and I
think a responsibility because what we
do here is going to change our history
it's going to color our possibility to
survive and for our children to survive
and have a rich future we have an
incredible gift in the boreal incredible
opportunity to preserve our best events
against global warming but we could let
that slip away the tar sands could
threaten not just a large section of the
boreal it compromises the life and the
health of some of our our most
underprivileged and vulnerable people
they include the Aboriginal communities
that have so much to teach us it could
destroy the Athabasca Delta the largest
and possibly greatest freshwater Delta
in the planet it could destroy the Great
Bear Rainforest the largest temperate
rainforest in the world and it could
have huge impacts on the future of the
agricultural heartland of North America
I hope that you will all if you've been
moved by this presentation join with the
growing international community to get
Canada to step up to its
responsibilities to convince Canada to
go back going back to be a climate
change champion instead of a climate
change villain and to say no to the tar
sands and yes to a clean energy future
for all thank you so much
you